feat: Kubewarden stack telemetry. (#51)
kubewarden/rfc: rfc/0023-kubewarden-stack-telemetry.md

|              |                                  |
| :----------- | :------------------------------- |
| Feature Name | Kubewarden environment telemetry |
| Start Date   | 2025-08-28                       |
| Category     | telemetry                        |

> | RFC PR       | [fill this in after opening PR]  |

Reviewer: This can be filled now

Reviewer 2: Reopening, we can set the state to IN-REVIEW or so, while we wait for CNCF approval.

| State        | **TO-BE-DEFINED**                |

# Summary

This RFC describes how the Kubewarden stack will send telemetry data about the
environment in which it is running. The goal is not to collect information
about user applications, but rather to learn more about the typical
environments where Kubewarden is deployed. This data will help guide the
project's future development.

> 

Reviewer: I would add a paragraph stressing out this can be turned off

Reviewer 3: It depends if we want to opt-in or opt-out by default.
As a project maintainer I would prefer to opt-in by default, it provide more data
As a project user, I would prefer to opt out by default :)

Ultimately I am fine with both but we need to take a decision on this

where users deploy the project. This information is invaluable for making
data-driven decisions about the project's future. For this reason, we would
like to add a feature to the Kubewarden stack that allows sending
non-sensitive, anonymous environment information to a central service for
aggregation and analysis

## Examples / User Stories

As the Kubewarden team, I want to know how many PolicyServers and policies are
typically deployed in an instance.

As the Kubewarden team, I want to know how many policies a PolicyServer usually
serves.

As the Kubewarden team, I want to know which Kubewarden versions are in use.

As the Kubewarden team, I want to know the most common Kubernetes versions used
with Kubewarden.

As a Kubewarden user, I want to help improve the project by providing anonymous
usage data without compromising my privacy or violating data protection
regulations.

As a Kubewarden user, I want to ensure that sending telemetry data does not
introduce a significant security vulnerability into my environment.

As a Kubewarden user, I want to ensure that the process of sending telemetry
data does not consume excessive resources in my environment.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe we can add a user story about a user who doesn't want telemetry data to be sent at all.

# Detailed design

This section describes two options to achieve this goal. Therefore, this
section is split into two subsections: the first option using OpenTelemetry,
and the second creating a dedicated controller reconciler.

> [!WARNING]
> As a CNCF project, it is necessary to get approval from the CNCF to implement either of the following options.
> [Telemetry Data Collection and Usage Policy | Linux Foundation](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/legal/telemetry-data-policy)

> ## Option 1: OpenTelemetry Integration

Reviewer 3: My main concern with this approach, is that we expect end users to provide extra effort to provide telemetry, which won't be done by most of end-users. If we don't opt in by default telemetry then we need to be sure that it can be enabled in the most straightforward way.

will be instrumented with telemetry collection points that send data to an
OpenTelemetry collector, which will then be configured to forward this data to
a remote location.

This option is inspired by previous observability work done in collaboration
with SUSE.

### Controller Changes

The controller's `kubewarden-controller/internal/metrics`
[package](https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden-controller/blob/main/internal/metrics/metrics.go)
can be extended by adding new metrics to track the number of PolicyServers and
policies deployed over time. These new metrics should also contain information
about the Kubewarden and Kubernetes versions in use.

The new metric can create time series for each policy like this, using the
time-series database to group similar series:

```go
policiesGauge, err := meter.Int64Gauge("deployed-policies", metric.WithDescription("The number of deployed policies"))
if err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err)
}
// Attributes represent additional key-value descriptors that can be bound
// to a metric observer or recorder.
commonAttrs := []attribute.KeyValue{
    attribute.String("policy_server_id", policy.GetPolicyServer().GetUID()),

>     attribute.String("policy_server_image", policy.GetPolicyServer().GetImageDigest()),

Reviewer 3: Are we planning to store policy names? This could lead to end user data leak depending on the name 
for example:

`oci://registry.corporate.com/mysupersecretpolicy`

Reviewer 3: Re-reading my comment, I realize that `policy_server_image` is for the server image but still what if the end user rebuilds the kubewarden images, is that an information we should track here

Author: Answering the question, the metric should not contains the policy server name or the policy name. To do not expose the registry url and other local information by accident. This proposal, which was not select by the team, would send only the oci artifact digest. No names. But this is not selected integration option.

    attribute.String("module", policy.GetModuleDigest()),
    attribute.String("kubewarden_version", KUBEWARDEN_VERSION),
    attribute.String("instance_uid", getInstanceUID()), // Corrected key name for consistency
}

policiesGauge.Record(context.Background(), 1, metric.WithAttributes(commonAttrs...)) // Corrected context.Background()
```

Once the metric is recorded, it is up to the OpenTelemetry collector to
manipulate the data and send it to a remote location, which can be another
OpenTelemetry collector or a time-series database (e.g., Prometheus).

### OpenTelemetry Configuration

In the OpenTelemetry collector configuration, a new pipeline should be added to
redirect the new controller metric to a remote location for further analysis.
This is an example of an initial configuration used to forward the metric to a
remote OpenTelemetry collector.

```yaml
receivers:
  otlp:
    protocols:
      grpc: {}
processors:
  # Control how much time we can wait before sending the metric to the remote Otel collector
  batch:

>     timeout: 1h

Reviewer 3: If we send the metrics every hour then it sounds more like real time monitoring

Author: This is a example configuration. It can be bigger. I just use the Longhorn [example](https://github.com/longhorn/upgrade-responder?tab=readme-ov-file#how-it-works). 

> Server will expect each instance of the application makes a request once per hour.

The telemetry server should store data to the Prometheus time series database
to be used later as a source for a Grafana dashboard. The metric should something like
the following:

```
deployed-policies{	"policy_server_id"="uid",
	"policy_server_image"="sha256:6c7d6433524e1dd7def937e123ee8f8f8da993fdc2297efaa6640b44f3285eee",
	"module"="sha256:44136fa355b3678a1146ad16f7e8649e94fb4fc21fe77e8310c060f61caaff8a",
	"kubewarden_version"="v1.28.0",
	"instance-uid"="uid"
	"country"="<some country>",
	"city"="<some city>"
```

## Helm Chart Changes

The Kubewarden Helm charts would require new values to configure the controller's CLI flags.

```yaml
stackTelemetry:
  enabled: true
  endpoint: "https://metrics.kubewarden.io"
  period: "1h"
```

When `stackTelemetry.enabled` is `true`, the feature is enabled in the
controller via the corresponding CLI flags.

# Drawbacks

This section is also split into two subsections, one for each implementation
option.

## OpenTelemetry Integration

- Potential for breaking changes in the OpenTelemetry specification or
  collector components.
- If a user already has a custom OpenTelemetry collector, integrating our

>   telemetry pipeline might be complex or they might filter our data out.

Reviewer: I think we can run as many collectors as we want. Meaning, that we could always deploy our own collector that sends the telemetry data to the remote location, regardless of the user having its own collector.

Author: Yes. Considering that we allow users to use their own [custom Otel collector](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/telemetry/custom-otel-collector#install-kubewarden-stack),  this would require the controller to send metrics to two different Otel collector. 

But as Otel integration will not be done, this is not relevant anymore.

|              |                                           |
| :----------- | :---------------------------------------- |
| Feature Name | Kubewarden environment telemetry          |
| Start Date   | 2025-08-28                                |
| Category     | telemetry                                 |
| RFC PR       | https://github.com/kubewarden/rfc/pull/51 |
| State        | **TO-BE-DEFINED**                         |

# Summary

This RFC describes how the Kubewarden stack will send telemetry data about the
environment in which it is running. The goal is not to collect information
about user applications, but rather to learn more about the typical
environments where Kubewarden is deployed. This data will help guide the
project's future development.

> Kubearden stack telemetry will be enabled by default, but users will have an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kubewarden stack telemetry will be enabled by default, but users will have an
```

> easy way to disable it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
easy way to disable it.
```

# Motivation

The Kubewarden team currently has limited visibility into the environments
where users deploy the project. This information is invaluable for making
data-driven decisions about the project's future. For this reason, we would
like to add a feature to the Kubewarden stack that allows sending
non-sensitive, anonymous environment information to a central service for

> aggregation and analysis

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
aggregation and analysis.
```

## Examples / User Stories

As the Kubewarden team, I want to know how many PolicyServers and policies are
typically deployed in an instance.

As the Kubewarden team, I want to know how many policies a PolicyServer usually
serves.

As the Kubewarden team, I want to know which Kubewarden versions are in use.

As the Kubewarden team, I want to know the most common Kubernetes versions used
with Kubewarden.

As a Kubewarden user, I want to help improve the project by providing anonymous
usage data without compromising my privacy or violating data protection
regulations.

As a Kubewarden user, I want to ensure that sending telemetry data does not
introduce a significant security vulnerability into my environment.

As a Kubewarden user, I want to ensure that the process of sending telemetry
data does not consume excessive resources in my environment.

> As a Kubewarden user, I want an easy way to disable the reconciler which send

Reviewer 2: I would reword and don't mention the reconciler nor a central location, just "an easy way to disable sending telemetry data".
The rest of user stories don't mention the reconciler, we haven't presented it yet, nor it is needed for understanding the story.

Reviewer: I agree with Victor, the reconciler is a technical implementation, what the user cares is the end result: have an easy way to opt-out form telemetry

environment telemetry data to a remote central location.

# Detailed design

> [!WARNING]
> As a CNCF project, it is necessary to get approval from the CNCF to implement either of the following options.
> [Telemetry Data Collection and Usage Policy | Linux Foundation](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/legal/telemetry-data-policy)

This feature involves creating a dedicated controller reconciler
that sends telemetry data to a remote server. It requires changes in some
Kubewarden components, as described below.

## Desired metrics

The changes described in this document aim to allow the Kubewarden team to
gather the following metrics:

- Number of active PolicyServers
- Number of active policies
- Average number of policies per PolicyServer
- Number of Kubewarden installations by version
- Number of Kubewarden installations by Kubernetes version

> 

Reviewer: I think it would be useful to have statistics about the policies being used. We should emit statistics only for the policies that have been authored by the Kubewarden project. We should not track policies created by the users, because that might expose some sensitive details.

We could do something simple, like sending the data only if the policy has been downloaded from the OCI registry of the Kubewarden project.

Author: Good point. We can definitely implement this, but we need to be careful with the data model to avoid performance issues in InfluxDB over time.

The core challenge is tracking a dynamic list of official policies. Storing the names as a single concatenated string in a field ("policy1,policy2") or as individual fields with boolean values ("policy1": true) could make querying difficult and inefficient. Since fields aren't indexed, we'd need to do slow, full data scans to get any meaningful insights. Considering these approaches, these could be examples of the requests payload:

```json
{
  "appVersion": "v1.28.0",
  "extraTagInfo": {
    "kubernetesVersion": "v1.33.0",
  },
  "extraFieldInfo": {
    "policyServerCount": 2,
    "policiesCount": 3,
    "policiesInUse": "ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/pod-privileged:latest,ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/user-group-psp:v1.5.0",
    "namespaceUid": "<namespace-uid-where-kubewarden-is-installed>"
  }
```

Or

```json
{
  "appVersion": "v1.28.0",
  "extraTagInfo": {
    "kubernetesVersion": "v1.33.0",
  },
  "extraFieldInfo": {
    "policyServerCount": 2,
    "policiesCount": 3,
    "ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/pod-privileged:latest": true,
    "ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/user-group-psp:v1.5.0": true,
    "namespaceUid": "<namespace-uid-where-kubewarden-is-installed>"
  }
```

A better approach would be to add each policy name as a tag. This would allow for fast filtering and grouping. However, this could lead to a high series cardinality problem. Every unique combination of tags creates a new series. As users add or remove official policies, new series are created, leaving old ones dormant. Over time, this could lead to high memory usage and degraded performance. Again, some example:

```json
{
  "appVersion": "v1.28.0",
  "extraTagInfo": {
    "kubernetesVersion": "v1.33.0",
    "ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/pod-privileged:latest": "true",
    "ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/user-group-psp:v1.5.0": "true",
  },
  "extraFieldInfo": {
    "policyServerCount": 2,
    "policiesCount": 3,
    "namespaceUid": "<namespace-uid-where-kubewarden-is-installed>"
  }
```

One alternative approach would be to send in the metrics the number of official policies in use. Like this:

```json
{
  "appVersion": "v1.28.0",
  "extraTagInfo": {
    "kubernetesVersion": "v1.33.0",
  },
  "extraFieldInfo": {
    "policyServerCount": 2,
    "policiesCount": 3,
    "officialPoliciesCount": 2,
    "namespaceUid": "<namespace-uid-where-kubewarden-is-installed>"
  }

```

With this approach, we loose the ability to know the individual policies in use. But we can know, at least, the amount of them related to the number of total policies deployed.

Author: Another ideia is to have a dedicated metric to keep track of  policy in use. 

```json
{
  "appVersion": "v1.28.0",
  "extraTagInfo": {
    "policyName": "ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/pod-privileged:latest"
  },
  "extraFieldInfo": {  }
```

That way, we reduce the number of tag in the metrics, witch mitigate the  cardinality problem. And we do not loose the ability to group and filter the data. However, this required another instance of `upgrade-responder` and more request to be sent by the controller (1 for generic metrics + 1 for each policy)

Author: If we want to rank the policies as sad by @davideiori1 , I believe we should go with the last option (dedicated metric) or the second option (the one of using policy names in tags but with the possible high cardinality problem)

Reviewer 4: @jvanz this is indeed a request from my side but I do not want to introduce any major refactoring to accomplish that. If that is the case, I suggest **we keep it simple** for now and record my request as backlog item for future enhancements.

Reviewer: I think we don't need to argue about the low level format we will use to expose this information, this can be discussed at a later stage when the actual development will start.

What is important here is to agree on the data we plan to send and get an approval for that.

Author: The thing is that data that we send to `upgrade-responder` is the data that will land in the InfluxDB. Therefore, it affect the queries that we will able to perform and by consequence the metrics we are able to track. That's why I've shared detailed options. 

This means that if we want to rank policies the controller probably should fetch/manipulate more information by the policies which affect the changes described in this document. If we do not mentioned that, we could hide  required actions.  Therefore, I see two options:

1. Do not mentions policies metrics at all and keep that for a second iteration of the metrics
2. Mention the suggested metric to here and add a text later in the  controller changes stating something like "fetch all the required data to allow the proposed metrics" 

I choose option 2.

- A configuration option to specify the endpoint that will receive the
  information.
- A periodic job within the controller to collect and send the information.

### Controller Configuration

The controller should have two new CLI flags to enable telemetry collection and
delivery: `--stack-telemetry-endpoint` and `--stack-telemetry-period`. The first
contains the full URL of the remote server. The latter defines the interval at
which the controller sends data, defaulting to `1h`. For example:

```
manager --leader-elect ... --stack-telemetry-endpoint="https://metrics.kubewarden.io/" --stack-telemetry-period=6h ...
```

When the `--stack-telemetry-endpoint` flag is not defined, no telemetry will be
sent. The feature will be disabled by default.

### Controller Information Collection and Delivery

When the telemetry endpoint is configured, a new periodic job should be created
in the controller to collect and send the data. This job can be implemented
using the Runnable interface from the controller-runtime package and integrated
into the manager alongside the existing reconcilers.

This new periodic reconciler will start a time.Ticker that will periodically:

> - Collect information about how many PolicyServers are deployed

Reviewer 2: There's a mix of phrases ending in dots and missing them throughout the document, I would like to have consistency.

- Collect information about how many policies are deployed
- Collect the Kubewarden version in use (this can be a constant updated on
  every release).
- Collect the Kubernetes version.
- Build a JSON payload with the collected data and send it to the remote server
  using secure communication.
- The controller logs the available updates for the Kubewarden version running returned by

>   the `upgrade-responder` server

Reviewer 2: Here is the first mention of the upgrade-responder feature. I would like to mention in the user stories that the user would get a (configurable) notification of new Kubewarden releases.

Edit:
this is the first and only mention, as it isn't listed on the controller nor helm chart changes, nor explained how the user would receive notifications. Maybe is a left over?

Since we expect users to manage the Kubewarden stack via Gitops, maybe this feature is not of much value, and can be dropped off.

Reviewer: Also, add a link to the `upgrade-responder` open source project, I know this is mentioned on the next section but it won't harm to have it here too (given it's the 1st time the reader jumps into that)

Author: If we remove the warning from the logs, the reconciler becomes unnecessary. Its goal is to provide users with useful information when they share telemetry data. If the reconciler does nothing with the response about available upgrades, there is no reason to include it. It would just be sending data with no clear benefit to the user. In that case, users could simply query the upgrade-responder from another application without sending metrics in the process

Reviewer 2: I'm ok keeping the "update notification" feature. But then, I'm not sure if the controller logs is a nice medium to serve that notification.

  }
}
```

When the `upgrade-responder` receives a request, it will:

1. Validate the payload using a predefined JSON schema.
2. [Infer](https://github.com/longhorn/upgrade-responder/blob/a6f6c7736b7e420b07ae7d813765dac778ebc638/upgraderesponder/service.go#L509)
   the origin's geo-location from the request's source IP address.
3. Store the enriched data in an InfluxDB database.
4. Respond the request with the available updates to the given Kubewarden version
   defined in the `appVersion` field.

The `upgrade-responder` will write the request data into an InfluxDB metric. The
`extraTagInfo` values will be added as
[tags](https://github.com/longhorn/upgrade-responder/blob/a6f6c7736b7e420b07ae7d813765dac778ebc638/upgraderesponder/service.go#L538),
while the `extraFieldInfo` values will be added as
[fields](https://github.com/longhorn/upgrade-responder/blob/a6f6c7736b7e420b07ae7d813765dac778ebc638/upgraderesponder/service.go#L558).

For example, the JSON payload above would result in a data point with the
following tags:

- `appVersion`: The Kubewarden version (e.g., v1.28.0).
- `kubernetesVersion`: The Kubernetes version where the controller is running
  (e.g., v1.33.0).

> - `instanceUid`: A UID to uniquely identify the controller instance.

Reviewer 2: I believe we need to explain how this `instanceUid` is unique. Is it unique per kubewarden-controller Deployment, or Kubewarden stack release (helm release)? 

I would expect it to be the second one. This allows us to not get duplicated data from several kubewarden-controller Deployments or restarts, and keeps consistent throughout upgrades.
Hence I believe it should be a random UID value created on `helm install`, not overwritten with `helm upgrade`, and saved as an opaque value in the Helm release ConfigMaps or Secrets.

We should also mention it in its relevant section (for example "Helm chart changes").

Author: Yes, the idea was to use to identify kubewarden stack installation. 

I don't like the idea to have an opaque value created by helm. It's solve the issu. But, to me, it looks a too complicated solution for a simple uid generation.  I was reviewing the longhorn code and I have an idea. In the longhord request sending the telemetry data, it sends the longhorn [namespace uid](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/blob/9af0bd566dc222cf54055193d119305c0f79496e/dev/upgrade-responder/install.sh#L266). That's solve our issue here as well. It's a unique UID for each Kubewarden installation. And, we do not need to add another resource in our Helm chart templates.

Reviewer 2: That sounds good enough to me. I suspect Helm creates a UID per release too, as it needs to know when to upgrade them. But then we would need to configure our charts with RBAC to read the Helm Secrets or ConfigMaps. Your suggestion sounds better indeed.

- `city`: City name extracted from the request's source IP.
- `country`: Country name extracted from the request's source IP.
- `country_isocode`: Country ISO code extracted from the request's source IP.

The same data point will have the following fields:

- `policyServerCount`: The number of PolicyServers deployed in the cluster.
- `policiesCount`: The number of policies deployed in the cluster.

> - `value`: A field always set to `1`,

Reviewer 2: Could we explain why the field is always set to `1`? (looked at the upgrade-responder but it was not inmediately obvious, and either the reader should know why, or not care why).

| :-------------- | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Purpose**     | Serve as indexed metadata used for filtering and grouping (e.g., `host`, `region`). | Hold the actual measured values (e.g., `temperature`, `cpu_usage`).   |
| **Indexing**    | Stored in an inverted index; queries on tags are very fast.                         | Not indexed; queries must scan data, which can be slower.             |
| **Cardinality** | High cardinality (many unique values) can degrade database performance.             | Low impact on performance; many distinct field values are acceptable. |
| **Data Types**  | Limited to strings.                                                                 | Support numeric types, booleans, and strings.                         |

### Grafana Dashboard

Alongside the `upgrade-responder` and InfluxDB, a Grafana instance with a custom
dashboard will be configured. The dashboard will use InfluxDB as its data

> source and provide queries to visualize the desired metrics.

Reviewer 2: Do we intend to have this dashboard public, or only accessible to Kubewarden maintainers?
If the second one (the usual one), I believe it would be good to document this here, and how the login is managed, as this seems to be part of the CNCF legal review.

### Telemetry Server Infrastructure

The `upgrade-responder`, InfluxDB, and Grafana instances used for Kubewarden
telemetry will be maintained by the SUSE team. All members of the Kubewarden

> organization on GitHub will have access to the collected data.

Reviewer 2: I would like to be specific here, maybe even linking to the [CONTRIBUTOR_LADDER.md](https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/CONTRIBUTOR_LADDER.md). Should it be only Kubewarden maintainers?

Author: I'm not sure if this should be only for maintainers. The CNCF folks should have access to this information as well. In the end of the day, they are the "owners" of the project. Therefore, they should have access to this information.

Reviewer 2: Then, we should mention this here. Maybe "people with access to the cncf-kubewarden-maintainers at lists.cncf.io" is the set we want, as that includes both.

Reviewer 2: I still believe that the current wording is ambiguous. By "members of the Kubewarden org" do we mean those listed in https://github.com/orgs/kubewarden/people ? If so, I would link that there then.

Personally, I would be happier with "people with access to the cncf-kubewarden-maintainers at lists.cncf.io", which follows the approach of other projects we have reviewed. It may also help users in feeling that their data (even if it only contains metadata that is anonymous) is better guarded.

Author: I've added your request in the document.

Reviewer 2: Many thanks! resolving.

> ## Helm Chart Changes

Reviewer 2: I would move this section upwards, after the "Controller changes" section. Hence one has the full changes in mind, to read how the infrastructure will interact with them.

The Kubewarden Helm charts would require new values to configure the
controller's CLI flags.

```yaml
stackTelemetry:
  enabled: true
  endpoint: "https://metrics.kubewarden.io"
  period: "1h"
```

When `stackTelemetry.enabled` is `true`, the feature is enabled in the
controller via the corresponding CLI flags.

The `stackTelemetry.enabled` setting will be `true` by default. Users will be

> notified during the Kubewarden stack upgrade that this telemetry is included,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
notified during the Kubewarden stack install and upgrade via Helm NOTES.txt that this telemetry is included,
```

Reviewer: Good suggestion

and instructions to disable it will be provided

# Drawbacks

- When new metadata or more metric data is required, it necessitates code
  changes and a new release for both the controller and, maybe, the telemetry
  server. The JSON schema versions must be kept in sync.
- We are solely responsible for ensuring secure communication (TLS,

>   authentication, etc.) with the remote telemetry server.

Reviewer: Is that a drawback? I think this implicit with all telemetry solutions.

The TLS certificate used by the server is going to be issued by a trusted CA that is part of the standard `ca-certificates` bundles.

As for the authorization, this must be in place only for the grafana dashboard, but this will delegate authentication to GitHub

Author: That's left over from the comparison with the Otel approach. Where we just need to do a configuration change instead of coding that in the controller.

# Alternatives

The following subsection is a option given during the write of this RFC. But it
was not select by the majority of the team. The team decided to move with the

> `upgrade-responder` option because the people that which will maintain the
> infrastructure more familiarized with the tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`upgrade-responder` option because this is a solution used by other
CNCF projects (Longhorn) and we (SUSE Rancher - who is willing to
pay for the infrastructure) also have experience managing and
maintaining the server-side infrastructure.
```

|              |                                           |
| :----------- | :---------------------------------------- |
| Feature Name | Kubewarden environment telemetry          |
| Start Date   | 2025-08-28                                |
| Category     | telemetry                                 |
| RFC PR       | https://github.com/kubewarden/rfc/pull/51 |
| State        | **IN-REVIEW**                             |

# Summary

This RFC describes how the Kubewarden stack will send telemetry data about the
environment in which it is running. The goal is not to collect information
about user applications, but rather to learn more about the typical
environments where Kubewarden is deployed. This data will help guide the

> project's future development.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This RFC describes how the Kubewarden stack will send telemetry data about the
environment in which it is running. The goal isn't to collect information
about user applications, but rather to learn more about typical Kubewarden deployment
environments. This data will help guide the
project's future development.
```

non-sensitive, anonymous environment information to a central service for
aggregation and analysis.

## Examples / User Stories

As the Kubewarden team, I want to know how many PolicyServers and policies are
typically deployed in an instance.

As the Kubewarden team, I want to know how many policies a PolicyServer usually
serves.

As the Kubewarden team, I want to know which Kubewarden versions are in use.

As the Kubewarden team, I want to know the most common Kubernetes versions used
with Kubewarden.

As a Kubewarden user, I want to help improve the project by providing anonymous
usage data without compromising my privacy or violating data protection
regulations.

As a Kubewarden user, I want to ensure that sending telemetry data does not
introduce a significant security vulnerability into my environment.

As a Kubewarden user, I want to ensure that the process of sending telemetry
data does not consume excessive resources in my environment.

As a Kubewarden user, I want an easy way to disable the Kubewarden environment
telemetry data sending

As a Kubewarden user, I want to receive warning in the logs about available
upgrades

# Detailed design

> [!WARNING]

> > As a CNCF project, it is necessary to get approval from the CNCF to implement either of the following options.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
> As a CNCF project, it's necessary to get approval from the CNCF to implement either of the following options.
```

> [Telemetry Data Collection and Usage Policy | Linux Foundation](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/legal/telemetry-data-policy)

This feature involves creating a dedicated controller reconciler
that sends telemetry data to a remote server. It requires changes in some
Kubewarden components, as described below.

## Desired metrics

The changes described in this document aim to allow the Kubewarden team to
gather the following metrics:

- Number of active PolicyServers
- Number of active policies
- Average number of policies per PolicyServer
- Number of Kubewarden installations by version
- Number of Kubewarden installations by Kubernetes version

## Controller Changes

To send information about the environment, the controller would be responsible
for collecting and transmitting the data to a remote, central place. The
controller already has access to all Kubewarden resources and can be granted
permissions to access other relevant information.

The main changes to the Kubewarden controller would be:

> - A configuration option to specify the endpoint that will receive the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- A configuration option to specify the endpoint that receives the
```

  information.
- A periodic job within the controller to collect and send the information.

### Controller Configuration

The controller should have two new CLI flags to enable telemetry collection and

> delivery: `--stack-telemetry-endpoint` and `--stack-telemetry-period`. The first

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
delivery: `--stack-telemetry-endpoint` and `--stack-telemetry-period`. The former
```

contains the full URL of the remote server. The latter defines the interval at
which the controller sends data, defaulting to `1h`. For example:

```
manager --leader-elect ... --stack-telemetry-endpoint="https://metrics.kubewarden.io/" --stack-telemetry-period=6h ...
```

> When the `--stack-telemetry-endpoint` flag is not defined, no telemetry will be

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When the `--stack-telemetry-endpoint` flag isn't defined, no telemetry will be
```

sent. The feature will be disabled by default.

### Controller Information Collection and Delivery

> When the telemetry endpoint is configured, a new periodic job should be created

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When configuring the telemetry endpoint, a new periodic job should be created
```

in the controller to collect and send the data. This job can be implemented
using the Runnable interface from the controller-runtime package and integrated
into the manager alongside the existing reconcilers.

> This new periodic reconciler will start a time.Ticker that will periodically:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This new periodic reconciler will start a `time.Ticker` that will periodically:
```

  using secure communication.
- The controller logs the available updates for the Kubewarden version running returned by
  the [upgrade-responder](https://github.com/longhorn/upgrade-responder) server.

The execution of this new reconciler should never interrupt the functionality
of the remaining reconcilers. This means that if the controller is
misconfigured with invalid endpoint, the reconciler should log an error and
continue.

## Helm Chart Changes

The Kubewarden Helm charts would require new values to configure the
controller's CLI flags.

```yaml
stackTelemetry:
  enabled: true
  endpoint: "https://metrics.kubewarden.io"
  period: "1h"
```

When `stackTelemetry.enabled` is `true`, the feature is enabled in the
controller via the corresponding CLI flags.

The `stackTelemetry.enabled` setting will be `true` by default. Users will be
notified during the Kubewarden stack install and upgrade via Helm NOTES.txt
that this telemetry is included, and instructions to disable it will be
provided

## Telemetry Server

The telemetry server will be an instance of the [Longhorn
upgrade-responder](https://github.com/longhorn/upgrade-responder).

> This server will receive information from controllers and store it in an

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This server receives information from controllers and store it in an
```

The `upgrade-responder` will write the request data into an InfluxDB metric. The
`extraTagInfo` values will be added as
[tags](https://github.com/longhorn/upgrade-responder/blob/a6f6c7736b7e420b07ae7d813765dac778ebc638/upgraderesponder/service.go#L538),
while the `extraFieldInfo` values will be added as
[fields](https://github.com/longhorn/upgrade-responder/blob/a6f6c7736b7e420b07ae7d813765dac778ebc638/upgraderesponder/service.go#L558).

For example, the JSON payload above would result in a data point with the
following tags:

- `appVersion`: The Kubewarden version (e.g., v1.28.0).
- `kubernetesVersion`: The Kubernetes version where the controller is running
  (e.g., v1.33.0).
- `city`: City name extracted from the request's source IP.
- `country`: Country name extracted from the request's source IP.
- `country_isocode`: Country ISO code extracted from the request's source IP.

The same data point will have the following fields:

- `policyServerCount`: The number of PolicyServers deployed in the cluster.
- `policiesCount`: The number of policies deployed in the cluster.
- `namespaceUid`: A UID to uniquely identify the Kubewarden stack installation.

>   This should be UID of the namespace where Kubewarden is installed.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  This should be UID of the Kubewarden installation namespace.
```

- `value`: A
  [field](https://github.com/longhorn/upgrade-responder/blob/a6f6c7736b7e420b07ae7d813765dac778ebc638/upgraderesponder/service.go#L49C36-L49C95)
  always set to `1`,
  [added](https://github.com/longhorn/upgrade-responder/blob/a6f6c7736b7e420b07ae7d813765dac778ebc638/upgraderesponder/service.go#L560)
  automatically by `upgrade-responder`. This default value ensures that the data
  point has a value for metric calculations, even if the request contains no
  other fields. In other words, it's a dummy InfluxDB field used to count the
  number of data points

  ### Request validation schema

>   upgrade-responder should be configured with a JSON schema used to validate the

Reviewer 5: Not sure about this one but how about:
```suggestion
  The `upgrade-responder` should be configured with a JSON schema used to validate the
```

| **Indexing**    | Stored in an inverted index; queries on tags are very fast.                         | Not indexed; queries must scan data, which can be slower.             |
| **Cardinality** | High cardinality (many unique values) can degrade database performance.             | Low impact on performance; many distinct field values are acceptable. |
| **Data Types**  | Limited to strings.                                                                 | Support numeric types, booleans, and strings.                         |

### Grafana Dashboard

Alongside the `upgrade-responder` and InfluxDB, a Grafana instance with a custom
dashboard will be configured. The dashboard will use InfluxDB as its data
source and provide queries to visualize the desired metrics.

### Telemetry Server Infrastructure

The `upgrade-responder`, InfluxDB, and Grafana instances used for Kubewarden
telemetry will be maintained by the SUSE team. All members of the Kubewarden
organization on GitHub will have access to the collected data.

# Drawbacks

- When new metadata or more metric data is required, it necessitates code
  changes and a new release for both the controller and, maybe, the telemetry

>   server. The JSON schema versions must be kept in sync.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- When requiring new metadata or more metric data, code
  changes will be needed. Along with a new release for both the controller and, possibly, the telemetry
  server. The JSON schema versions must be kept synchronized.
```

# Alternatives

The following subsection is a option given during the write of this RFC. But it
was not select by the majority of the team. The team decided to move with the
`upgrade-responder` option because this is a solution used by other CNCF
projects (Longhorn) and we (SUSE Rancher - who is willing to pay for the
infrastructure) also have experience managing and maintaining the server-side

> infrastructure

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The following subsection is an option provided during the writing of this RFC. But, it
was not selected by a majority of the team. The team decided to move forward with the
`upgrade-responder` option because this is a solution used by other CNCF
projects (Longhorn). Also, we (SUSE Rancher — who is willing to pay for the
infrastructure) have experience managing and maintaining the server-side
infrastructure.
```

## Not selected option: OpenTelemetry Integration

This implementation option aims for a less intrusive approach, decoupling the

> controller from the telemetry backend. With this design, all telemetry will be

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
controller from the telemetry back-end. With this design, all telemetry will be
```

managed outside the Kubewarden controller's reconciliation loop. The controller
will be instrumented with telemetry collection points that send data to an

> OpenTelemetry collector, which will then be configured to forward this data to

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry collector, which will be configured to forward this data to
```

can be extended by adding new metrics to track the number of PolicyServers and
policies deployed over time. These new metrics should also contain information
about the Kubewarden and Kubernetes versions in use.

The new metric can create time series for each policy like this, using the
time-series database to group similar series:

```go
policiesGauge, err := meter.Int64Gauge("deployed-policies", metric.WithDescription("The number of deployed policies"))
if err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err)
}
// Attributes represent additional key-value descriptors that can be bound
// to a metric observer or recorder.
commonAttrs := []attribute.KeyValue{
    attribute.String("policy_server_id", policy.GetPolicyServer().GetUID()),
    attribute.String("policy_server_image", policy.GetPolicyServer().GetImageDigest()),
    attribute.String("module", policy.GetModuleDigest()),
    attribute.String("kubewarden_version", KUBEWARDEN_VERSION),
    attribute.String("instance_uid", getInstanceUID()), // Corrected key name for consistency
}

policiesGauge.Record(context.Background(), 1, metric.WithAttributes(commonAttrs...)) // Corrected context.Background()
```

> Once the metric is recorded, it is up to the OpenTelemetry collector to

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Once the metric is recorded, it's up to the OpenTelemetry collector to
```

manipulate the data and send it to a remote location, which can be another
OpenTelemetry collector or a time-series database (e.g., Prometheus).

### OpenTelemetry Configuration

> In the OpenTelemetry collector configuration, a new pipeline should be added to

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In the OpenTelemetry collector configuration, a new pipeline will be added to
```

        - 'name != "deployed-policies"' # metrics not called deployed-policies will be dropped
  attributes:
    - key: kubewarden_version
      action: upsert
      value: v1.28.0 # this value can be defined in the Helm chart installation
    # Note: The Kubernetes version can often be populated automatically by an Otel resource detector.
    - key: kubernetes_version
      action: upsert
      value: v1.33.0
exporters:
  otlphttp/remoteKubewardenOtel:
    auth:
      authenticator: bearertokenauth
    endpoint: https://metric.kubewarden.io
service:
  pipelines:
    metrics:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [attributes, filter/dropInternalMetrics, batch]
      exporters: [otlphttp/remoteKubewardenOtel] # Corrected to match exporter name
```

This OpenTelemetry configuration can be used to control the telemetry export
and can be expanded over time to include more metadata by leveraging the rich
ecosystem of OpenTelemetry
[processors](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor),
potentially with no changes to the controller code. This makes telemetry
customization more flexible. In the example above, processors are used to add

> labels, filter unrelated metrics, and batch metrics before sending.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This OpenTelemetry configuration can be used to control the telemetry export
and, be expanded over time to include more metadata by leveraging the rich
ecosystem of OpenTelemetry
[processors](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor).
This would potentially need no changes to the controller code. This makes telemetry
customization more flexible. In the example above, processors will be used to add
labels, filter unrelated metrics, and batch metrics before sending.
```

All OpenTelemetry collector configuration can be managed in the Helm chart
installation/update. The remote endpoint would be provided in the Helm Chart
values. If the `stackTelemetry.enabled` is disabled, the OpenTelemetry

> configuration will not be applied:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
configuration won't be applied:
```

```yaml
stackTelemetry:
  enabled: true
  remoteOtelEndpoint: "https://metrics.kubewarden.io"
  batchTimeout: "1h"
```

The remote OpenTelemetry collector's configuration is abstracted from the user.
For instance, it could use the [GeoIP
Processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/geoipprocessor)
to add location information to the received metrics.

> # Unresolved Questions

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
# Unresolved questions
```
